[Nonoko] This is Mr. Sun.
And this is Mr. Moon.
This mountain is the Earth.
And this is my Grandma.
Oh, how beautiful.
Ah, good morning, Shige.
I don't think I've ever seen
such a magnificent specimen.
- [laughs] Oh, you are too kind.
- What species?
Those there are Mino
chrysanthemums and these...
- No, the caterpillar.
- Hm?
Don't know.
Don't worry. Some day you'll
be as gaudy as that flower.
Yep, that's Grandma.
Mother, come on. Let's go.
[whimpers]
Mother, come on!
Here's my mommy.
And that's me, Nonoko.
Hm. What should I make
for dinner tonight?
Hm.
Enough. I'll go for it.
Something really great.
- What are you going to make?
- We've had curry every night.
So I'm thinking... more curry.
This is my daddy
and older brother Noboru.
Dad, do you think
all this studying
is really worth my time?
Listen up.
Studying is not about
what's worth it.
Classes that seem worth it
may turn out to be not worth it,
and therefore not worthwhile.
But sometimes things
that are worthless
may actually be worthwhile,
worthless or not.
So it's not about whether or not
something is worthless or not.
What in the world
are you talking about?
Mm, that was so not worth it.
[sings]
[sighs]
So if Dad had been
handsome and really smart,
and Mom had been truly beautiful
and a wonderful cook,
and our family was really rich,
my life would be
completely different.
- [sighs] I got a raw deal.
- That's enough out of you.
If your father and I
hadn't gotten married,
neither of you
would have been born.
You wouldn't even be here had
it not been for the two of us.
Yeah, right.
What do you know?
If I had cooler parents,
I wouldn't be so lame.
That's stupid. What do they
teach you in that school?
- Haven't you heard of genetics?
- He's right.
You cannot choose your parents.
And I'm just
supposed to accept that?
That is so unfair.
I mean, look.
I'm me and Dad's Dad
and Mom's Mom, right?
Uh-huh... What? Huh?
Oh, who are you?
Where did I come from?
Where am I? Who am I?
I see.
Once upon a time, Mommy and
Daddy weren't married at all.
[bridal march]
[Man] And Takashi and Matsuko
are off to a great start
in their new life.
Let's give them
a warm round of applause.
[applause]
[Woman] Congratulations,
Matsuko and Takashi.
I would like to offer
both your families
my warmest wishes
on this special day.
You set out today
across the ocean of life
with the wind in your sails
and boundless prospects
on the horizon.
But life, as they say,
has its ups and downs.
It may seem easy
when the waters are calm,
but at times
the waves will taunt you,
tossing you in their swells.
Take heart
and don't get discouraged.
Although it's hard
to make it on your own,
even the stupidest couple
can survive life's challenges
if they just stick together.
So take my advice and have
children as fast as you can.
Children are the best reason
to weather life's storms.
[babies cry]
[cries]
[Woman] People say child-rearing
is challenging and difficult.
But we've been doing it
since the dawn of time.
Children grow up,
even without their parents.
So hold them close to your heart
and they will turn
out just fine.
Having children will make you
appreciate your own parents.
Sure, maybe you always thought
your parents were
a pain in the butt.
But one day they'll be the ones
babysitting your kids
and buying them toys.
And if you play your
cards right,
you can probably get a nice
inheritance out of them too.
So Matsuko and Takashi,
always remember,
honor your mother and father.
Always remember,
the land is in my name.
Excuse me, Mother, but I'm
the one who built this house.
And you couldn't have done it
without my land.
And we are so grateful
to you, of course.
But please, don't forget
how hard I've worked.
And your room is a beauty.
It always has the best light.
Of course it does.
Especially if you consider
the house was built on my land.
And why do you insist that you
built this house by yourself?
With all due respect,
I did build this house
with my own hands!
That's enough. You two
should be ashamed of yourselves.
That's right. There's no point
in all this arguing.
- Listen to Noboru.
- It will all be mine anyway.
- Hey! Come back here!
- Get back here!
Don't let him get away!
Come back, Noboru!
[Woman] But as you sail
across the ocean of life,
what should you fear most?
Wild storms?
Treacherous currents?
No, the truth is
that the ocean of life
is most dangerous when it's calm
and there's hardly
a ripple in sight.
When the waters are rough,
any family can weather
the wildest storms
if they join hands
and pull together.
But life is different
when the ocean is calm.
The wind dies down.
You sigh and relax.
And you forget
to hold onto each other.
Are you listening?
Matsuko! Takashi!
This is very important.
When there are
no challenges to share,
it is all too easy
for a family to drift apart.
You never know
what terrible dangers
lurk just below the surface.
Oh, sure, you'll try to sail on.
But you won't catch the wind.
And you won't know
which way to turn.
So you'll pull out
the oars and row.
But you won't agree
on which way to go
and you'll start wondering
how you all ended up in the same
boat in the first place.
And that's what
drives families apart.
- Turn right at the next corner.
- This one?
No, turn left. No, right!
- Make up your mind!
- No, maybe it was left.
- Which is it?!
- [brakes screech]
[crash]
[both laugh]
Ah, let's do it again.
Our turn!
[Narrator] A Family Torn Apart.
Oh, we're never gonna
get there this way.
- Turn at the next lights.
- No, keep going straight!
What? It's on the left.
- Ignore her. Just go straight.
- Knock it off, all of you!
Goodness! Why can't you just
keep quiet like Nonoko?
Huh? She's not here.
- Where is she?
- She's not in the car?
I think you better pull over.
Where do you think
we could have lost her?
Noboru, weren't you
watching her earlier?
Yeah. While Dad and I were
waiting for you and Grandma.
Maybe she got tired of waiting
and wandered off.
No, I think she was
with us on the bench.
[giggling]
We're done.
Finally. Do you know
how long we've been waiting?
Sorry. I didn't think
it would take so long.
- I could have got a smoothie.
- Oh, let's go already.
The sporting goods store
is gonna close.
There you go.
She must still be there.
You were so annoyed with us
you completely forgot about her.
Hey, if you hadn't been late,
this wouldn't have happened.
Poor little Nonoko.
Left behind because everyone
got excited over nothing.
How can you say that, Mother?
Like you weren't there too.
We were late because we had
to find your flannel underwear.
That's just great.
There goes the sports store.
Noboru, stop being so selfish.
What would you do if something
happened to your little sister?
What do you mean, something?
Do you mean kidnapped?
Mm-hm.
She's adorable, just like me.
Will you stop joking around?
Oh, I hope she remembers
that saying I taught her.
- What saying?
- The PTA Kids saying.
Never, ever,
ever, ever talk to strangers.
Is that the kind of nonsense
they teach kids these days?
It's like saying all strangers
are common criminals.
Don't worry.
Nonoko's got big teeth.
Oh, cake! I want some!
- Okay. Just one bite.
- Yum.
- Just like Jaws.
- Stupid.
[car horns beep]
Let us through! My daughter's
about to be kidnapped!
- We can't even get to a phone.
- We should have called first.
- See? We need a cell phone.
- Can't you just be quiet?
Oh, Nonoko!
Hey, are you lost?
Oh. I guess you're waiting
for somebody, huh?
Who are you waiting for?
Hey, can't you talk?
Then why don't you say anything?
I'm not supposed to talk
to strangers I don't know.
I know. "Never, ever,
ever, ever talk to strangers."
Is that right?
Well, you can talk to me.
You've been a good boy.
You followed the rules,
so now it's okay.
Hey, don't be sad.
My mommy and daddy and grandma
and Noboru, they all got lost.
- Did you lose someone?
- Mm-hm.
- My mommy.
- Your mommy?
I can't find her
anywhere at all.
That's weird. There's
so many lost grown-ups today.
But finding just one
shouldn't be too hard.
Come on. Let's go.
Excuse me. This boy's name
is Toshio Kimura.
Can you please page his mommy?
- Are you lost?
- No, he's not. His mommy is.
Of course she is.
Let's see. Kimura.
What was his first name?
- [both] Toshio.
- Oh, yes. Toshio.
Wait here and I'll
be right back.
And who are you? His sister?
Uh-uh. Not me.
I didn't just lose my mommy.
I lost my whole family.
♪ Where's my kitty Where's
my kitty, little lost cat?
- ♪ So far away from home
- [turns off radio]
[sobs]
Come on. Stop crying.
We're here.
What do you mean,
her mother came and took her?
How could that be?
I'm her mother.
Interesting.
You let a total stranger
take my baby?
No, I wouldn't do that, ma'am.
They seemed to know each other.
They did? Who was it?
How should I know?
- What?
- She must have tricked you!
I don't think so. Her mother
seemed to know who she was.
- But I'm her mother!
- Knock it off!
- Go on.
- I just don't understand.
When the woman arrived, Nonoko
seemed very happy to see her.
She ran right up to her
and leapt into her arms.
[screams] Who could it be?
Miss, could you
just page her, please?
But, sir, they've already left,
through that exit over there.
- She's not here.
- Come on! Let's go!
I've never seen
such an odd family before.
Hey, Dad,
where do you think you're going?
- To find them.
- Find who?
Nonoko and that kidnapper woman!
- But how?
- Uh...
That's right. We don't even
know which way they're headed.
Hey, don't worry.
Nonoko knew the lady, right?
She must have
taken her back home.
That's it. Noboru's right.
Yes, of course!
That must be it.
I don't know. People you know
can be the most dangerous.
Mother!
Don't you think we should notify
the police about this situation?
- The police?
- And what should we tell them?
- You should confess everything.
- Confess?
Yes. That four adults
abandoned a sweet little girl
and left her to fend
for herself.
Wait. Does Nonoko have a key?
- [gasps]
- Let's roll!
- Nonoko!
Nonoko! Ow!
Nonoko!
- Nonoko!
- She's not here!
What did you expect?
The door was locked.
[phone rings]
Yes, hello. Yamada residence.
Oh, thank heavens!
Thank you! Thank you so much!
We're so grateful!
Oh, yes. We were
looking for her everywhere.
I'm so sorry to trouble you.
Yes, right away.
We'll come collect her.
I mean, to pick her up.
What is this?
You even made her dinner?
Oh, you're so very sweet!
I don't know how
we can ever thank you.
I just spoke to your mother
and they just got home.
They said they'd be
coming over any minute now.
- Thank you, Auntie.
- Oh, it's my pleasure.
I have to say, I'm very curious
to hear all about what
happened from your parents.
[Narrator] "Joyful laughter
breaks the silence
of an autumn eve."
Basho.
♪ Look up and see
the sky is blue
♪ And the clouds are white
♪ It will work out for you
and you'll be all right!
- [snores]
- Next stop, Pepperoni Pizza.
- Pepperoni Pizza.
- H u h ?
- Oh! I must have dozed off!
- Stop requested.
Excuse me.
Where am I? Did I miss my stop?
Don't push the button
to ask me that!
[Narrator] Domestic Goddess.
Oh, it's raining.
[gasps]
I didn't bring
in the laundry! Argh!
Huh?
What's the matter?
Great! I already brought it in.
You never hung it up!
I'm going out.
Do we need anything?
Oh, there was something.
But I can't remember what it
was. Think, think, think!
Oh...
Well, I can't wait. Goodbye.
Wait, wait! It's right
on the tip of my tongue.
Oh...
Mm... Huh?
- Wait! Hold on!
- Hey! What is your problem?
Um... Oh... I think
it was something like uh...
I think you should
let this one go.
[gasps]
Hey. It's bread.
Oh, for heaven's sake.
Mother, wait!
I forgot my purse.
Mom, I'm home.
Hm, wonder where she is.
Hey, noodles.
And she left
the water boiling! Great.
She'll never know I ate them.
[Matsuko] Oh, that's so sweet,
making me noodles.
You tricked me.
What?
Porch light's out again.
So soon? I guess
I'll get another bulb.
Oh, no. We're all out.
Why don't you switch it
with one from another room?
Hm. Who won't miss their light?
- [snores]
- Ah, this will work.
- More tea, please!
- Same for me.
- Me too!
I'm busy with the dishes.
Come and get it yourselves.
[all] Rock, scissors, paper.
There are clean cups
on the counter over there.
And while you're there,
go ahead and finish the dishes.
Hey!
That was Tanaka.
He's on his way over.
What? You're kidding!
We'd better tidy up.
Ow.
Okay. This, this, this.
And maybe one of these.
Here. Here. Here.
What on earth are you doing?
We'll just tell him
we're spring-cleaning.
Ow.
Here. Here. Here.
[Narrator] Marriage,
Yamada-Style.
I already told you
it's on the kitchen table.
- Well, I don't see it.
- I'm sure it's there.
- I don't see anything.
- Then you're not looking!
It's a Manila envelope
with "OKK" in big red letters.
Are you looking for this?
[laughs]
Well...
Okay, if it's not there,
it's not there.
- Ready.
- Here.
They say after 20 years,
you can read each other's minds.
- I meant the paper.
- I'm still reading it.
- [growls]
- It's amazing.
[yawns]
Wait, Takashi.
I need you
to pick up a few things.
- Sure.
- Lettuce, cucumbers, ham,
light bulbs and garbage bags.
- I'll make you a list.
- Hey, it's okay. I'll remember.
Lettuce, cucumbers, ham,
light bulbs and garbage bags.
See? I remember the list,
I just forgot to do the
shopping.
- Lettuce. Cucumbers.
- [mumbles]
Well... Hm... Let's see...
Come on. Hurry up.
Don't tell me
you've already decided.
Just pick. I'm starving.
Hm.
I guess I'll have
a Shanghai special.
Sounds good. I'll have the same.
What are you still doing here?
What's that supposed to mean?
Can't a guy just take it easy
on his day off?
Sure, but usually you
can't wait to play pachinko.
I'm taking a break.
More tea?
How about making me
some noodles for lunch?
Sure, honey.
Wait. Make that some
coffee instead. No, tea.
Oh, yeah, you'd better start
cleaning the bathroom too.
It's a mess.
Oh, and pick me up some
cigarettes when you go shopping.
[growls]
I can't take it any more!
Matsuko. Matsuko.
- Hey, where did your mother go?
- Playing pachinko.
[Commentator] Kawate is pitching
a beauty tonight.
It's a tight ball game.
It's 1-1 here in the eighth.
Kawate delivers.
There's a swing and a high
fly-ball to right field.
This looks like an easy play
and that is
the end of the inning.
An easy catch,
three up, three down.
It's the last
of the eighth inning.
Nishi will come up for the
Giants. Giants 1, Dragons 1,
here at the Big Egg,
the Tokyo Dome.
- Ah, my movie's gonna start.
- [growls]
If they can beat
the Dragons in this one,
especially the way the Dragons'
pitching has gone tonight,
that would evoke the great
days, those halcyon...
- Game's still on.
- But I've waited all week!
- No way!
- Move it.
I think you're right. They've
been on a roll for so long
that you compare them to those
great teams from the past.
I think the old-timers miss
the days of Korakuen Stadium
because great things
happened there.
The Giants won nine
consecutive championships...
Then they moved.
They needed a bigger ball park
because they were
sold out every game.
But they've lost a lot of
the atmosphere they had
at the Korakuen Stadium.
- Now no one can watch TV.
- This is much more interesting.
Let's see what happens. It's
one to one, last of the eighth.
Now he swings
and there's a drive...
Look!
Yay! I win!
No!
- [laughs]
- Stop that! Stop that!
[♪ tango]
[Takashi strains]
Ouch.
Hey, Noboru.
You want to play a little catch?
Huh.
[Narrator] Father-Son Bonding.
No Trespassing
Hold on a sec. The dad
always plays the catcher.
Ah, come on, give me a break.
Okay, this is for a curve.
This is for a fast ball.
And this is for a slider.
- Ah, come on, give me a break.
- Okay, there's two outs.
Bases loaded, and
the relief pitcher comes in.
I'm supposed to be
the starting pitcher.
- Oh, come on, give me a break.
- Are you kidding me?
Your team at school
doesn't even let you pitch.
What difference does
it make? Who cares?
- Let's just play.
- Okay. Show me what you got.
But remember,
the team's counting on you.
There's two outs
and the bases are loaded.
What? Hm.
Hmph!
- [grunts]
- Uh-uh.
Huh?
- [grunts]
All right. Let's go.
- [glass smashes]
- Oh, for Pete's sake!
- Hey, Dad. What are you doing?
- Huh?
Listening to this language tape.
Repetition is the key
to learning.
Don't count on it, Dad.
In my professional experience...
- Study harder.
[repeated] Study harder.
No!
It all sounds like a
broken record.
Just study harder.
Hey, Son, want some sake?
- Mm.
- Honey!
Mm... Eugh!
[laughs] Pretty strong, huh?
No, too dry.
Too dry?
- Why, you sneaky little...
- I'm gonna...
Come here! Get over here!
[screams]
Hey, Noboru,
want to play some catch?
What for?
What for? I just thought
maybe we'd do a little bonding.
I don't think we need
to play catch to do that.
Well, no, but...
Don't you think
we should at least
try to do something together?
Not now. Maybe later.
What's the matter
with kids these days?
Another example of
parental failure.
[Narrator]
Patriarchal Supremacy Restored.
Noboru, don't dump rice
in your soup.
It's bad manners.
Soup must go over the rice.
- What's the difference?
- Are you kidding?
[slurping]
It makes all the difference.
You're both hopeless.
[grunts]
See? Water must go
over the cement.
Hm... Let's see.
What do you think
you're doing? That's rude.
Don't hover over the food.
Take it with purpose. Commit.
Actually, I was eating that.
Oh. Sorry.
Don't put it back!
That's disgusting!
[snickering]
Hey, Dad, what should I do
for my research project?
Why ask me? It's your research
project. You figure it out.
I'm trying
but I'm drawing a total blank.
Can you do it
on anything you want?
- Sure. Anything.
- I see.
So you have complete
and total freedom.
- That makes it really hard.
- Mm-hm. Yeah, I know.
Ah, freedom.
Hm.
Complete freedom
to do anything at all.
Hm.
Total freedom.
To do anything.
But when you have it,
what do you do with it?
[gentle waves crashing]
I wouldn't know what to do.
[birds sing]
He's taking this so seriously.
He's thinking about
what happens after he retires.
[Narrator] Father As Role Model.
Oh, it's snowing.
Hey, it's snowing!
Let's get a picture!
- What? Not now.
- Don't be so childish.
I'm cold. Close the door.
[all gasp]
[all] Oh!
Where's the camera?
I think I put it
in the top left-hand drawer.
[all] Huh?
It's not here. Ugh.
- [all sigh]
- Why do you keep moving things?
Oh, I'm trying to watch TV.
[TV: dramatic music,
wind howls]
[shutter clicks]
Brr.
Cold.
[Narrator] "A lone figure, back
turned,
receding into the mist."
Santoka.
Yamada Family Chronicles.
[all]
Happy New Year, one and all.
[Narrator] The first
of the year.
[Takashi grumbles]
Ready?
Go!
Takashi, Takashi, Mother
Matsuko, Nonoko, Takashi...
[repeats names rapidly]
31 seconds... A new record!
- [moaning]
- Pretty good, eh?
[Narrator] The dead of winter.
- I need some tea.
- Can you bring some cake?
- And some soda.
- And some fruit.
And turn up the heat
while you're at it.
[all] Thank you.
[woman sings in Japanese]
[Narrator] Spring showers.
- [Matsuko] Hello.
- Can you bring my umbrella?
Noboru, your father's at the
station. He needs an umbrella.
[Noboru] Can't someone else
do it? I'm studying.
[Grandma] You go. When did
you two last share an umbrella?
[Matsuko] I just
don't feel like it right now.
- [Grandma] Excuse me.
- Noboru, can't you take it?
- Send Nonoko!
- Forget it. I'll buy one.
[Matsuko] Great. Pick up
some ground beef too.
Okay, fine.
[Narrator] "A spring shower,
dressed
for rain, talking as they go."
Buson.
How weird.
Noboru's sock is missing,
Nonoko's pajamas,
and Takashi's towel too.
- Socks and pajamas?
- And Takashi's towel.
[both] Oh. Uh-huh.
That must mean...
Look. There they are.
The black hole.
[Narrator] Dynamic Duo.
I think I'll order
some sushi for dinner.
What? But it's so expensive.
Why don't I just make some?
I'm so clever! [chuckles]
Um... Mother?
Sushi's too easy. I thought I'd
try something more interesting.
Hm.
So what did you decide to make?
Beef stronanogoffanon...
How can you cook it
if you can't say it?
Sure I can.
Beef stroganoff
with peas and carrots.
- So you can say it.
- It's not that hard.
Beef stronagoff
is beef stronagoff-goff.
Whatever. Just make it.
Darn. I really had a craving
for some of Mom's sushi.
Yeah, I messed it up.
Order the sushi.
[Narrator] The Iron Chef.
Ah. Miso soup,
a fried egg and seaweed.
That is a perfect
Japanese breakfast.
- What? That's weird.
- Huh? What?
Are these leftovers?
Yesterday's soup?
Seaweed from Noboru's lunch?
You're three for three.
- Today will be your lucky day.
- Right. Whatever.
Have a nice day.
Matsuko!
Matsuko,
so what's for breakfast?
Hm? What are you
babbling about?
You just had your breakfast.
You're not getting senile,
are you?
- Maybe I am.
- Must be.
I made noodles... Oh!
[gasps]
Heavens, I must have
eaten them all myself!
What?
- What's this?
- Hotpot.
Hotpot? We just had that
the other night.
But it tastes so good
in the winter.
Okay, help yourself.
It's more like
"Cook it yourself".
We're having noodles
for lunch again?
We had noodles yesterday.
And the day before that
and the day before that.
I can't take it any more!
Are we having
noodles again tomorrow too?
I can't help it. We have to eat
these gifts your father got.
Besides, we've got plenty
of ginger in the garden.
[moans]
[Narrator] Ginger Morning.
Ginger tastes so good
in miso soup.
Yes, it does.
But eating too much ginger
can make you forget things.
Oh! Noboru forgot his books.
Don't worry. He'll be back
for them any minute.
You're right.
Oh, no! I forgot!
[screams]
I forgot to take
off my pajamas!
- See you tonight.
- Bye!
Have a nice day.
I'm leaving.
Oh, no! My shoes!
Where's my shoe?
- Watch it!
- You too?
What's the matter
with you two?
- I'm gonna miss my train.
- I'm so late!
Okay, then. Be careful!
Bye, Mommy.
I'll see you later.
Have a good day at school.
[sighs] Why can't anyone
remember to close the door?
- What's this doing here?
- Oh, no. Nonoko's lunch.
- She forgot it.
- She won't need it till noon.
That's true but...
I know. I'll just bring it
to her when I go shopping.
Oh, that would be
such a big help.
- Okay, I'll see you in a bit.
- Great. Thanks again, Mother.
That's weird.
Uh-oh. She can't go shopping
without her purse.
I'm sure she'll be back.
Okay, Pochi,
watch the house while I'm gone.
Oh, no. I left the
tea kettle on.
- [doorbell]
- Mrs. Yamada!
You have a package!
Is she out?
No. Door's open. Anyone home?
Watch out!
Hey! Mrs. Yamada!
Thank heavens. What a relief.
[Man] Are you okay?
Did somebody break in?
- Oh.
- Huh?
[giggles]
Well, here's your package.
Thanks. So sorry.
- Your signature, please?
- Oh, certainly.
Hold on. Let's see.
Where did I put it?
It's on the left in the back
of the second drawer.
Ha. Oh, yes, that's right.
- Bye. Thanks again.
- Thank you very much.
Sure.
I went to the school
and dropped off Nonoko's lunch.
I thought you said
you were going shopping today.
- You forgot your purse.
- [gasps]
- I guess I forgot.
- Ah.
It must have been
all that ginger.
Oh.
[Narrator] Regret.
[radio: classical music]
What?
Is that Mahler?
I never knew Mrs. Yamada
liked classical music.
- [music off]
- [gasps]
[Narrator] Beauty ls Fleeting,
Life ls Long.
How beautiful.
I wonder how many more times
I'll see the cherry
blossoms in bloom.
What are you talking about,
Mother? You're still young.
You're only 70.
About 30 more times then,
I guess.
Mother, would you mind
paying this bill for me?
Sure. I'll take care of it.
- You have to pay it in person.
- I know.
After all, I'm not a child.
Well, she had fallen
and couldn't get up.
[laughs] Oh, my!
That sounds horrible!
Maybe I'm getting senile!
Okay. See you later.
- Take care of yourself now.
- You too, deary.
I dropped it in the
mailbox by mistake.
[Woman on PA]
Dr. Amasawa to ICU.
Oh, Shige.
Thank you so much for coming.
Of course. I came as soon as I
heard you were in the hospital.
You'll never believe
what's been going on.
Please. Have a seat.
- You see?
- Hm?
- There.
- Huh?
That gentleman visiting
that patient over there.
What?
I'm convinced
they're having an affair.
- You don't say!
- Shh!
- Are you sure?
- Something's going on.
I'm positive they've
been fooling around.
Huh.
Well? Don't you think so?
This is the VIP room.
You know that corrupt
city councilman?
- He's faking an illness.
- Huh.
Once in a while, I like to come
here to get a bit of fresh air.
[laughs]
[both slurp]
Hey, these noodles are
delicious, don't you think?
I guess so.
If you think
the noodles were bad,
you should try
a cup of their coffee.
- [laughs]
- Look, I don't get it.
Why are you in the hospital?
[cries]
Oh, Shige.
[sobs]
[Narrator] "No sign of death's
approach
in the cicadas' voices."
Basho.
Ah! Why, Mother!
Why don't you turn on the light?
Oh. I didn't even notice
it was getting dark.
Crazy lady.
Hey, Noboru.
Quit wasting electricity!
But I'm not asleep! Grrr!
[Narrator] Age Comes
Before Wisdom.
Just five more problems.
God, I'm so tired.
Get up and take a hot bath.
It will wake you up.
Move it!
- You see?
- Hm! I'm wide awake!
Okay. Let's go!
Let's go! Let's go.
Let's go... Oh.
[snores]
He cooked himself too long.
He's as limp as a noodle.
Remember, don't give up.
You're entering
the home stretch.
The last five minutes of a test
will make or break you.
[growls]
Okay, time's up.
Please pass your papers
to the front.
Oh, man, I'm so hungry. I want
to get some pepperoni pizza.
- It's so good.
- Teacher!
Tanaka got sick during the test
and went to the nurse's office.
- So?
- Shouldn't we get extra time?
Nice try.
[Matsuko] Take them upstairs
and put them in the closet.
All right, all right.
Hm?
Is that Noboru
studying like a mad man?
[sighs] Yes,
he had his final exams today.
He did miserably.
What do you think
about getting Noboru a tutor?
- Does he need one?
- He could really use the help.
You really think so?
Okay. But don't you think
it's gonna be kind of expensive?
For a qualified tutor
to come once a month, 300.
[all] What?!
- For 300 bucks, I'll tutor him.
- For 200 bucks, I'll tutor him.
Hey, for 100 bucks,
I'll tutor myself.
This is pointless.
Why do I bother?
[sighs]
[Narrator] "Fleeting dreams,
an octopus making its home
in a trap, a summer moon."
Basho.
[panting]
I'm home!
- Look! Chocolate!
- Wow!
Mommy!
Noboru spent all
his money on chocolate!
No, I got them
for Valentine's Day!
[Narrator] Ah, Youth.
Gone! It's gone!
They're all gone!
I'm home!
What happened
to the cookies I bought?
- I ate them.
- What?
I bought those cookies
for a girl at school!
- Sorry!
- Sorry won't work this time!
Mommy's the one
who made me eat them with her.
You ate them with Mom? Oh!
What?
Darn it. I forgot my umbrella.
[Girl] Hey, Noboru.
You can borrow mine.
- What are you going to use?
- I'll be okay.
Tanaka!
I forgot my umbrella!
That's too bad.
Don't catch a cold.
Well, that didn't work.
Hey, what do you think
you're doing?
- Give it back!
- It's too late now!
- I only lent it to you!
- I'm still borrowing it!
I didn't know they were dating.
Hey-hey, Nakamura!
You come back
to beat up the teacher again?
You're a funny guy. I'm here
to tell 'em I got into college.
Wow, that's great, man.
Hey, Teach! If it's Nakamura
you're hiding from, don't worry.
What? I'm gonna go warn
his home-room teacher.
[both laugh]
[Boy] Hey, Yamada, Yamashida.
Let's go get
the new Swimsuit Edition!
Shh!
Hi!
Funny seeing you here.
Oh. Huh? Tragedy in Bosnia?
That's some
pretty serious reading.
Sure. I need to know
what's happening in the world.
I'd love to read it
when you're done.
This is a tragedy. Oh.
I'm home.
- Noboru. Where's the book?
- Here.
Well, I gave you money
to buy it. Show it to me.
What is this?
The World of Formula 1 Racing?
I thought I could use it to help
with my English and Geography.
Yeah, right.
It's like
Reading With Power Rangers,
the book you bought me when
I was little, but with cars.
Noboru! There's a girl
on the phone.
[all] What?!
[Noboru] Coming!
- Hello?
- Noboru?
Yeah, it's me.
[girl speaks rapidly]
Uh-huh. Uh-huh.
- [rapid speech continues]
- Uh-huh.
[rapid speech continues]
Get out of here!
- What did you say?
- What? What was that?
- Oh, no, nothing.
- Oh. So, anyway...
[speaks rapidly]
Yeah? [giggles]
How could he get a girlfriend
with a face like that?
- A real girlfriend?
- Why is he all red?
- [speaks rapidly]
- Yeah, sure.
- Gotta go. Bye.
- See ya.
[phone beeps]
Hmm.
- Oh! His heart's racing!
- It's arrhythmia!
I want to hear!
[growls]
[door slams]
[footsteps thud]
- Do you think he's upset?
- You were embarrassing him.
You should talk! You were
the one checking his heart rate.
[loud pop music]
[grunts]
[yells]
[strains]
Woo-hoe! Yeah!
[laughs]
Yes!
[Narrator] "The scent of plums
on a mountain path,
suddenly dawn."
Basho.
More Yamada Family Chronicles.
- It's me. I'm home.
- [Matsuko] Welcome back.
[belches]
[Narrator] An autumn eve.
I'm starving.
- Make me something.
- Sure, dear.
[moans]
Do you want crackers
or a banana?
[groans]
[slurring] I've been working
all day long. I'm exhausted.
And all we have to eat
are crackers? Crackers?
- So have the banana.
- How stupid.
Who would eat a banana?
[groans]
My light.
[Pings]
Here. Drink this.
[Narrator] "Turn toward me.
I'm lonely too.
The autumn dusk." Basho.
Your mom's sick with a cold,
so we're going to order
some takeout.
- Seaweed special.
- Me too.
I'll have a salmon special.
How about for you, Mother?
I'll have the combo.
I'll be right back.
[Matsuko] Hold on.
I want tempura and soup!
[Narrator] Going My Way
Croquet Tournament
Not bad.
[Man] Hey,
wait a minute, ma'am.
What do you think you're doing?
Huh? But there's plenty of room.
That's not the point.
There's an election.
This wall is reserved
for candidates.
Yes, but, officer...
This was the only thing
posted here.
[gasps and stammers]
Oh, if it isn't Saburo.
Hey, you,
this is my turf, you know.
Well, if it isn't Shige.
We might as well work together.
We're both volunteers.
Huh.
That's your side.
This is my side.
- Don't cross the line.
- Oh, boy.
The woman hasn't changed at all
in over 6O years.
Uh-oh. Forgot
to take out the garbage.
Hm. I guess I'll do it now.
But you can't do that now.
Today's recycling day.
Okay. Take this to the station,
Noboru, the park,
Nonoko, the school.
- What?
- You can't do that.
Why not? Gets the job done.
- Forget it.
- See you later.
Wait! Ow!
I volunteer my time
to clean up the park,
and you're gonna
dump trash there?
I'm not dumping.
I'm gonna use the trash can.
Over my dead body.
- Ooh! Ow!
- Come back here.
Where did she go?
OW!
[Narrator] Honesty
ls The Best Policy.
Excuse me.
Can you please get our ball?
Is it this baseball, shiny and
new, or this old rubber ball?
[both] The rubber one.
Honesty is always best.
Don't you forget it.
[both] Mm-hm.
- Here. Have this one too.
- Wow!
[both] Thanks, ma'am.
Excuse me,
we lost our ball here yesterday.
- A brand new baseball.
- Uh...
It's not here.
Are you sure?
I'm sure this was
the right house.
I'm begging YOU-
Please ask Akuchi to give
those boys their baseball back.
Oh, that's so sad.
Oh, the poor dears. They're
all wilted from the hot sun.
Mother, stop it.
You know what I mean.
- Yes, of course.
- Those awful bikers.
And look at what they did
to the poor little guard rail.
Oh, Mother.
But the saddest thing of all
is that a child was killed.
- [approaching engine]
- Duck!
[fireworks]
Again? Those bikers
are driving me crazy.
They're down by the park.
I bet they're doing
the littering.
- I'll talk to them.
- No, don't! That's suicide!
An old man just got killed
for doing the same thing.
It was in the paper.
Senior Citizen Murdered
Mm. Fair enough.
You'll just make it worse!
[grunts]
Mother? What's with the get-up?
She's headed to the park
to talk to those bikers.
I can't stop her. Do something!
Uh... Mother, that helmet was
a gift from an important client.
- It belongs to me.
- Oh, I see.
Well, that's no good at all.
Why don't you go and sit down?
All right. Then why don't
you go talk to them?
Who, me?
Come on.
They're not that bad.
They'll go away eventually
if we just leave them alone.
If they're not bad, you've
got nothing to worry about.
Get out there. Be a man.
Then they will respect you.
- Respect me?
- Oh, but Mother.
I know. I'll go call 911.
Don't do that to those kids!
They'll wind up
with criminal records.
Criminal records? Hm.
[motorbikes approach]
[motorbikes fade into distance]
See? They're already gone.
Are you sure?
- [motorbikes approach]
- Hey, they're back!
- [motorbikes pass by]
- We're counting on you.
Okay, okay,
I'll go take a look.
Please be careful, dear.
Let's see.
Okay-
Hm.
[clears throat]
[whistles]
She didn't even see me coming,
know what I'm saying?
Yeah, did you see
that car I was looking at?
That was a sweet ride.
Hey, who's this guy?
Huh? What's he looking at?
Hello... guys.
- You say something?
- It's awfully late and...
Yeah, so what?
- You got a problem, pal?
- No, no problem.
I'm just here to talk.
No problem.
I do have a request, though.
Um...
- Okay, old man.
- That's bright.
Say what you have to say.
Would you mind turning off
your headlights, please?
Oh, I get it.
So, is that all you want?
- Well, no...
- So what is it?
Ooh! The light thing again.
Um...
♪ Come, come, fireflies
♪ This water's bigger
That water's sweet
- ♪ Get something good to eat
- What is that?
♪ Aye-aye-aye-aye-aye
♪ Yo, yo, yo, come, fireflies
♪ Fireflies, aye-aye-aye-aye ♪
What's up with these old bags?
Are you all right?
Old bag, huh?
You've got a lot of nerve,
disturbing the neighborhood.
Mother!
Don't mess with these punks.
Who are you calling a punk?
Well, heavens to Betsy.
What an impressive voice
you have, young man.
- Mother, no!
- And just look at you.
Such a big, strong man.
I bet when you talk,
everyone can't help but listen.
- What are you getting at?
- Oh, so scary.
I see why that fellow
shut up so fast.
- Yeah, that's right.
- I believe it.
Going up against you
would be like
a frog going up against a snake.
It must be great
having everyone pay attention
to every single thing you say.
- Guess so.
- Listen to me.
You should try
scaring people straight.
I bet you'd have a
wonderful time.
- Say what?
- Wouldn't you rather be a hero?
You know,
like the Moonlight Rider?
Don't be ridiculous.
Ah, maybe you're right. People
don't believe in heroes now.
They look the other way
when they see something bad.
But maybe you
could set them right.
You're scared of nothing.
If someone throws a cigarette
or a soda can from their car,
you could yell, "Pick it up!"
with that big voice of yours.
Or if you see a kid making
trouble on a crowded train,
you could set him straight,
just like a big brother would.
I think you would have fun, and
everyone would look up to you.
You would be an idol
to everyone.
A genuine hero.
It's wonderful to have people's
gratitude and appreciation.
You can keep
the local hooligans in line
and even shake them down
for a bit of pocket change
now and then.
What do you say?
Turn over a new leaf and
become a champion of justice.
I promise it'll be a lot more
fun than making a racket
with that noisy bike of yours.
I think this old lady's lost it.
You think so, huh? What a pity.
You have so much potential.
Let's roll.
Promise me you'll
think about it!
Hey, you!
Don't forget these!
Mm. Maybe it'll sink in.
Mother!
Noboru! Nonoko!
Mother! No!
[laughs]
[Crying] Mother!
[both cry]
Mother! Come back!
[both] Hey!
It's the Moonlight Rider!
Oh!
The Moonlight Rider!
- Please!
- Mercy! Have some mercy!
[both scream]
[Shige groans]
Mother!
Noboru! Nonoko!
Mommy!
[crying]
You saved them!
Thank you, Moonlight Rider!
[both cry]
Hm.
[Narrator] "How cruel.
A grasshopper trapped under
a Warrior's helmet." Basho.
I'm home.
Did you remember your umbrella?
Now, look. Your husband
just came home tired from work,
and the only thing
you have to say is,
"Did you remember
your umbrella?"
Okay. Hello, dear.
Welcome home.
Where's your umbrella?
I forgot it.
[hums]
- [Matsuko] Welcome home.
- Lookie.
Today I remembered my umbrella.
How about that? Huh!
- Hm.
- What?
What's wrong?
Don't you believe me?
But, honey, you didn't take an
umbrella to work this morning.
Hm?
- Hm.
- [growls]
[Narrator] Section Chief Yamada.
- I got cake.
- What?
Why, this is
not like you at all.
Are you feeling guilty
about something?
- Course not.
- Now, Matsuko, dear.
Just because Takashi
brought him a little cake...
And I got custard too.
Now that's suspicious.
Nonoko! Noboru!
Your father brought home
a little cake for you!
Hm.
- Where's Daddy?
- On a business trip.
He left his briefcase.
Oh, no!
He forgot to take it.
And his scarf and train pass.
Huh?
[screams] He was supposed to
leave early today.
Takashi! Takashi!
[moans]
- [Narrator] Section Chief
Yamada.
- I guess Mom overslept.
She woke up so late
she thought that Dad had
already left on his trip.
Oh. Okay.
[mumbles]
This is crazy!
What is he doing sleeping?
Gotta get there.
Gotta get there. My shoes...
- Here. Don't forget this.
- I'm off.
- Hurry!
- [both] Bon Voyage!
[groans]
Be careful!
I can make it, I can make it.
Look out, lady! Look out!
Hey, are you all right?
Gotta call.
Hello. It's Takashi.
Yes. I'm not feeling
so well today.
Okay. Uh... yes.
No, I'll be there.
I'll get there somehow.
Please. Apologize for me.
Yes. I'm terribly sorry.
[groans]
99.1.
- You should stay home.
- [moans]
It'll get worse if you don't.
You won't win any awards
for going in.
Yeah, you're right. And that'll
give me a whole three days off.
I think that would be
the best thing.
Besides, it'll be good
to spend some more time at home.
What's the matter now?
It's funny. Now that
I decided to stay home,
I'm starting to feel better.
Maybe I should
go to work after all.
Okay. Take care.
[birds twitter]
[applause]
And now, Mr. Yamada
will offer his congratulations.
Make sure you don't
forget your notes. Here.
He's really nervous.
Ahem.
Hi.
Today is auspicious.
Huh? "Cucumbers, carrots,
half a pound of beef"?
[whimpers]
[splutters]
Who can say what
life will bring?
[clunk]
It might... Things might...
look like they're
going pretty okay,
then all of a sudden,
you're pushed off a cliff.
And sometimes you might realize
it's by the one person
you depend on most.
Hey, he means you!
[inhales]
My dear Ichiro, Kazuko,
sometimes, take life
as it comes.
You see, that's the secret
to surviving the bad times
without losing heart
or getting divorced.
Divorced? Argh!
Whatever your partner does,
if it wasn't intentional,
you can bear it.
You have to bear it. You must
bear it to get through life.
I hope he knows
what he's doing.
Saying that it can't
be helped...
...is not the same thing
as copping out.
In fact, it's the key
to marriage.
It's the key
to building a happy family.
And it's the key
to conquering life's challenges.
However tough life gets,
it can't be helped.
This may sound pessimistic,
but repeat it like a mantra,
and you will
never be defeated in life.
I underestimated him.
He really is a man.
[both sob]
Um...well, I... I guess um...
Ichiro, my friend, Kazuko,
you have my warmest
congratulations.
May you both overcome every
challenge life has to offer.
♪ When I grew up
and fell in love
♪ I asked my sweetheart
"What lies ahead?
♪ Will we have rainbows
day after day?"
♪ Here's what
my sweetheart said
♪ Que sera sera
♪ Whatever will be will be
♪ The future's not ours to see
♪ Que sera sera
♪ What will be will be
Shave your head, then no one
will notice you're going bald.
- [laughs]
- Shut up, you.
- It's time you got dentures.
Cut it out, both of you.
With a little more weight,
you could be a sumo wrestler.
- She's right.
- Why, you...
[cries]
How many times
do I have to tell you?
Do not argue
in front of the children.
I can't hear the TV!
I see why this family
gets along so well.
Because all three grown-ups
are certifiably insane!
- What's that?
- Why, you...
If even one of you
were remotely normal,
things would fall apart!
♪ Que sera sera
♪ Whatever will be will be
♪ The future's not ours to see
♪ Que sera sera
♪ What will be will be
Teacher,
what's your goal in life?
- Changing jobs?
- Getting married?
Well, if you must know...
- Here it is.
- [all] Oh!
Que sera.
What will be will be.
♪ Que sera sera
♪ Whatever will be will be
♪ The future's not ours to see
♪ Que sera sera
♪ What will be will be
♪ Now I have children of my own
♪ They ask their mother
'What will I be?
♪ Will I be handsome
Will I be rich?"
♪ I tell them tenderly
♪ Que sera sera
♪ Whatever will be will be
♪ The future's not ours to see
♪ Que sera sera
♪ What will be will be
[all laugh]
- The whole family's in it.
- Let me see.
- Like peas in a pod.
- Look at your funny face.
[all laugh]
- Let's get something to eat.
- How about cutlets?
- I want pizza!
- Tempura!
- Spaghetti!
- Shut up! I'll decide.
[woman sings in Japanese]
[Narrator] "The ocean
in spring,
the gentle rolling of the waves,
all day long." Buson.
♪